---
title: ZMK v0.3 Migration Guide
sidebar_label: v0.3
description: Migrating to ZMK v0.3
---

## Change Summary

ZMK v0.3 introduces initial support for [wired split](https://zmk.dev/docs/features/split-keyboards#full-duplex-wired-uart) devices as well as various bug fixes and minor improvements. For more details, see the [v0.3 release notes](/docs/releases/notes/v0.3).

## Breaking Changes

There are no breaking changes in this release.

## API Changes

:::note

ZMK does not currently offer any API stability guarantees. Using third party modules with additonal functionality is supported, from a build/design perspective, but any particular upgrade may change APIs that results in changes needed to those third-party modules. If using any such modules, and experiencing build failures when updating, reach out to the module author for assistance.

:::

- Refactors of split APIs in [#2766](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/2766)
- Added a BLE function for getting profile addresses in [#2992](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/2992)
- Add a source info to the battery event in [#2901](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/issues/2901)

## Migration

Given the lack of breaking changes, the migration only involves switching your builds to target the new release.

## Building With ZMK v0.3

Depending on how you use ZMK, follow the appropriate steps to move to ZMK v0.3:

### User Config Repositories Using GitHub Actions

#### ZMK CLI Upgrade

If using the [ZMK CLI](/docs/zmk-cli), you can easily use it to switch your target ZMK version.

From within your ZMK config repository, run:

```bash
zmk version v0.3
```

#### Manual Upgrade

For user config repositories, a few small changes are necessary to pin your ZMK version and the version of the workflow used to build the firmware:

1.  First, update your GitHub Action workflow to pin to the new version. Replace the contents of your `.github/workflows/build.yml` with:

    ```yaml
    on: [push, pull_request, workflow_dispatch]

    jobs:
      build:
        uses: zmkfirmware/zmk/.github/workflows/build-user-config.yml@v0.3.0
    ```

1.  Next, update your `config/west.yml` to reference the correct revision of the ZMK repository. There are a few ways the revision is selected, so details will vary. First, check under the `projects` key for an entry named `zmk`. If that has a `revision` value set, update that, e.g.:

    ```yaml
    manifest:
    ---
    projects:
      - name: zmk
        remote: zmkfirmware
        revision: v0.3
        import: app/west.yml
    ```

    However, if the revision is not set explicitly there, it is likely pulling the value from the `defaults` for the manifest, and you should set the value there, e.g.:

    ```
    manifest:
      defaults:
        revision: v0.3
    ```

Commit both file changes to your repository and push, and you should get a fresh build using the ZMK v0.3 release.

### VS Code & Docker (Dev Container)

If you build locally using VS Code & Docker then:

- Use git to check out the `v0.3-branch` tag of ZMK by performing `git checkout v0.3-branch`.
- Perform a `git pull` to ensure you've got the latest changes.
- Reload the project
- If you are prompted to rebuild the remote container, click `Rebuild`
- Otherwise, press `F1` and run `Remote Containers: Rebuild Container`
- Once the container has rebuilt and reloaded, run `west update` to pull the updated Zephyr version and its dependencies.

Once the container has rebuilt, VS Code will be running the Docker image associated with the v0.3 release.

### Local Host Development

The following steps will get you building with ZMK v0.3:

- Run the updated [toolchain installation](/docs/development/local-toolchain/setup) steps, and once completed, remove the previously installed SDK version.
- Install the latest version of `west` by running `pip3 install --user --update west`.
- Use git to check out the `v0.3-branch` tag of ZMK by performing `git checkout v0.3-branch`.
- Perform a `git pull` to ensure you've got the latest changes.
- Run `west update` to pull the updated Zephyr version and its dependencies

From there, you should be ready to build as normal!
